We won't be having.
Morning welcome. Good morning,
Mr. Speaker. Good morning.
Good Morning.
Welcome to the Governance and Administration Committee.
Got a, um, hearing with you today until, um,
quarter past nine. And, sorry, sorry.
It's a lot of talk behind the meeting started.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, and we will give you opportunity to make some opening
comments if you wish, and then move
into questions from the committees.
Thank you very much for joining us more.
Uh, well, I'll, the only opening comment I'll make is
that, um, I think the two
agencies have done the best they can with the budget
that's been provided, uh,
but signal, uh, that the many years
for which those budgets have been static, uh, have kind
of run to the end course.
Uh, and we're now starting to find that, uh,
the demands from members of Parliament for services, uh,
and the expectations from members of Parliament
for services, there's becoming increasingly difficult
to meet, uh, the current budget.
So I'd expect that, uh, this next budget round,
there will be a number of changes, uh, that
that should be anticipated.
And, uh, all in favor of, uh, you know,
members own, uh, workloads.
Um, any other opening comments? No.
Yeah, I just, uh, wanted
to follow on previous hearings, uh, with the committee
and questions that the committee has asked in the past.
So I thought, uh, I would give you some update.
Uh, the first one is regarding the, uh, progress
with the future accommodation strategy.
Uh, so we've made significant,
significant progress over the past year.
You would have seen building is looking more like a building
now at the back.
Um, and we expect the buildings to be fully operational
by 2027, uh, mid 2026, you will see the exterior done,
uh, and work on the interior would have been, uh, started.
Um, we also got some funding
that came from the executive wing annex, uh, for us
to fix the, uh, south library, which was Earthquake Brown.
So we are considering the options, uh, in terms of fixing,
uh, that building.
Um, but with changes
to the earthquake prone building system, we are considering
what the options are for, for that area.
Um, you would have seen the work on precinct.
The infrastructure of the precinct still continues.
Um, but we've done, we've made a really, really good,
uh, progress there.
Uh, we also, uh,
developed new ministerial seat suites on the executive wing.
Uh, we are working on the accessibility of, uh,
buildings including, uh, work in the chamber, uh,
to allow a member that, uh, for example, sh a wheelchair
to have better access to it.
Our work in security still continues.
Uh, we introduced a new service, uh, uh, which was part
of the, in, in the previous parliament by the election,
but is now fully operational,
which is assisting members when they go to public events.
Uh, and so we provide advice, uh, on those events.
And also, um, uh, company members when necessary.
And if members are not aware of this service,
I encourage them to, uh, to,
to reach out to the security team.
Uh, but it's, it is had a really good uptake over this year.
Um, that's pretty much, that's pretty much it for me.
Can I just make a comment about the
planetary library building?
It's the, uh, uh, the very ground floor of it, uh,
where there were 15 offices put in, uh, to that area
and 2018.
Uh, and at that time, it was assessed as 85% of,
of, uh, national building standard.
Uh, when the standards changed, it dropped to 15%,
but nothing had actually altered inside the building
to bring it back from that 15 to the 85
that it costs about 90 million.
Um, the question now is, uh, does any of
that need to be done at all?
Because it's, it's still a very viable building,
but there will be some safety enhancements
that might move it beyond the current 85.
Uh, but that's obviously, uh, uh, quite a, uh, a reduced,
massively reduced cost.
And, um, it's worth the committee knowing
that we were right, we'd actually gone out to tender for
that, to spend that 90 million, which, uh, uh,
has been put on hold 'cause of the reconsideration.
And I think you have to see those standards as being, um,
rules that are working out on paper
that don't take into consideration the actual nature
and shape of any particular building.
Sorry, that, yes. Um, yeah. I've got, yeah, quick, sorry,
Just a quick on that, just, just
so I've understood this Mr.
Speaker. Is that because of a reassessment of the building
or just because the change that's coming
through in legislation?
If you take the assessment of the building against the,
uh, changes of legislation, then, uh, it completely,
there's fine, it goes back to the, uh, uh, former, uh,
uh, considerations, which, which would put it at around
that 85% of national building code,
which is very high for any
commercial building. Yeah. And, and
That, and that save that.
Just remind me, how much is that saving or that
Saved? Well, we don't know
yet.
The budget was eight 90 million approved inside
that future accommodation strategy.
Uh, we'll, we'll work out what's necessary to bring it up to
standards so the people are confident about
going in there. Thank you.
And Glen and I had our first offices
down there, so You Pardon?
Glen and I had our first offices down
there, uh, in the library.
Right. So we're pleased to hear that it's, um,
that it's looking like it's
Still On the door. It was just
quite nobody else. Quite ridiculous.
Uh, thanks, uh, Glen,
Uh, yeah, thank you, Mr. Speaker.
And I want to come back to your opening remarks.
Uh, and I was looking at the, uh, documents,
the strategic intentions of the office of the clerk
and the, um, service that was, you signed off last year,
where you talked about the fact they play a
Critical Part in ensuring a healthy,
robust representative democracy for New Zealand.
And then you obviously went to say that the,
they're doing the best they can with the budget they have
and the demands that mps are putting on them.
Can you just, can you just talk a bit more to
that? And then the last comment,
I think, hang on. I better clarify
that it's not
that the mps are being demanding.
Okay. It's that there are demands on mps that, uh, uh, uh,
are, are changing.
And, um, I'm sure David would be able to speak to that
and RAF as well, more specific stuff.
But if you think of just even, uh, what we now need
to provide for security inside, um, uh, out of,
out of parliament offices, um,
and the frequent with which, uh, we are having
to engage in activities that, uh, come from various threats
that, that are made to mps, they all come at a cost.
And, uh, you can keep trimming in all sorts of directions.
The other one is, uh, the, uh, increasing costs of those out
of pilot offices, um,
and the across the country between, uh, people
that might have, uh, several offices in, uh, uh,
low cost areas, uh, big, big electorates, for example,
uh, small towns.
Uh, but someone in a, an urban electorate faces, you know,
a big percentage, their budget, um,
the current budget just for the rental.
So trying
to look at ways which we smooth some of that out as well.
Mm-hmm. Do you want to add to that ref?
That's pretty much, yeah. Mr.
Speaker, one thing that's been discovered
through the consultations speakers directions is that in,
in equity across the country with, uh,
rents in different places.
So we, we are working on, uh, suggest the proposals
for the parliamentary service commission on how to fix that.
Mm-hmm. So, supplementary, do you think
that in the past year that we have been able
to do our jobs properly?
And as you said about a robust democracy, we've been able
to deliver that with the, the money we've had?
Well, it would require me
to make a comment about individually performances, which is
not really the purpose here today,
but I think, I think, look, you can stretch anything, uh,
indefinitely until it completely breaks.
But I think at the moment, the, given that the funding
for this hasn't increased for how many years? Oh,
At least seven. Wow. From memory
Seven years, seven or eight years.
Mm-hmm. That's a long time to, um, continue operating, um,
as we have been and,
and not having a blowout on an annual basis.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Thank
You. And, uh, did,
have you finished your I, yeah.
Andy? Yeah. Um,
Just wonder if you could, um, so
The Parliament Bill haven't been passed.
Um, how are we going in terms of the, the preparation
of the implementation, that particular training
around the security staff?
Yeah, you can ask that. There is,
there's a processes, I, I know there is
Staff. Yes.
We, uh, we, we've got, uh, uh, plan
for the training in place.
Uh, and we are, uh, starting
that training in February on time for good certification
of those, uh, security officers.
Uh, and we think it should be, uh, we we're done
by the second quarter of next year.
So the angles have it all in place by midyear. Yes. Yeah.
Cool. Good.
Cian, Thank you.
I'd like to preface my question with a big thank you.
Um, the library staff, um, fantastic.
At answering questions.
Um, officer of the Clark take you through some of the,
when you can make an amendment when you can't very,
in a very helpful way.
And, you know, the security staff, they always know
where a meeting is if we don't, so, you know, it,
it's pretty awesome to to, to be supported like that.
So well done. And I hear
what you're saying about the tightness of the budget.
What I wanted to go on to see, to ask was to
what extent you measure the morale of staff,
and that's in particular in relation to the
very increased workload, the increased urgency,
the record number
of submissions on the treaty principles bill,
which everyone knew was not going to go any further.
It's one thing to have a lot of submissions
where you feel you might make a difference,
but to have a lot of submissions where,
you know what the answer is.
Was that tough on staff?
I can answer that. Um,
because we, um, the parliamentary service
and the office of the clerk do quarterly, uh,
engagement surveys with our staff, um,
and engagement has remained really high, um,
higher than the, um, the public sector average.
Um, and, and that's what we use as comparative,
because it's the most similar workforce.
So it has remained really high, I think.
I mean, they had, you know, we, we as well
as doing a survey, people can give comments
and they, I think we have commented on the impact of the,
uh, the, I guess the heavier parliamentary workload on,
on their sort of work life balance.
But engagement and morale does remain really high.
Well, that's credit to Thank you.
Just to be to know, also,
the Standing Orders Committee is looking at, uh,
ways in which, uh, there might be, uh, a better, uh,
processes for dealing with, uh, multiple submissions.
'cause I don't think they're gonna stop.
I think the capacity now, particularly with AI to send in,
uh, submissions that are of a similar nature,
but quite different, uh, is, is just going to grow.
So we have to have some way of responding to that.
Uh, and we've had some very good engagement at
that committee with, uh, uh, various people
who are regular submitters, um, who have, have identified
that as a problem as well, uh, including Professor Kelsey,
who's been a quite a critic
of the way in which things have been done, uh,
but now sees actually, there's a need
to change the way in which my students are received
and dealt and, uh, has made, uh, you know,
good submissions on that. Thank you,
Tom. Um,
Mr. Speaker, in your opening remarks,
you just made some comments about,
and I, Glen touched on it in this line of questioning around
the financing for, uh, mps,
what will the Parliament bill changes have in that regard?
Uh, well, one of the things that's, uh,
interesting about the Parliament Bill is that it,
it makes Parliament itself responsible for its own budget
as opposed to the executive.
And so, um, mfe, uh, will be able to submit,
uh, to the body that oversees that probably partnership,
service commission, um, uh, to make clear
what their needs are in their electorates.
And then there'll be a, I think in my experience over the
years, quite a genuine consideration of whether
or not those requests are, uh, legitimate.
Uh, whether they are more driven by, uh, political needs
as opposed to, uh, representative needs.
Uh, and, and that will then flow through,
into, into funding.
I just wanna flesh that out. Are you, um, suggesting
that you expect that, um,
rather than every MP getting a lump sum
and everybody gets the same allocation that mps based on,
say, and you referenced it, the size of their electorate,
potentially a rural, larger rural population
or smaller towns or communities that they may be able
to apply to have an increase on their parliamentary budgets
versus those who, um,
live in postage stamp electorates, for example?
Well, that is already the case, but with
The rural, with the large electorates, yes.
And the, the criteria
for determining a large electorate is, uh, fairly, you know,
um, uh, I was gonna say inconsistent.
It's not inconsistent, but it's, it's just a, uh, uh,
arbitrate formula that's put together and where you go.
Uh, but that doesn't take into account that, um,
someone living with one
of those large electorates may be able to fund, uh,
several offices for a fraction of the cost
of someone living in a rural, at a, an urban, urban area.
And so, uh, I think you can expect be some change
to the way in which the allocation of funding
inside your budget for, uh,
our out palm offices is, is likely to change.
But I don't wanna, um, uh, you know, uh, you know, uh,
predict what the, uh,
partnership service commission may decide on that,
because that's the proof for all party members.
What about, um, what we often see take place
around the pooling of funding where, um,
mps who don't have constituency offices effectively have an
advantage where, because they don't pay
for the running costs of an electorate office, the power
that's associated with it, the staff costs
that are associated with it,
and they pull their funding together as a, potentially
as a political party, and then can use that nationwide,
rather than those who are constituency mps who have
to use it in their electorate.
Is there any thought around sort of stopping
that from happening and making it more equitable for those
that are constituency mps?
Well, that's why the, the focus on the, um,
facilities is the first point.
Uh, second point I make is that, um,
some parties in particular have asked for, uh, bulk funding
for quite some years mm-hmm.
And continue to do so.
So, um, to, uh, ignore that,
to block it out, I think we'd be right.
All parties, to some extent are using the, the, uh, capacity
to, to bulk funds together, uh, to one,
to one degree or another.
So I don't think that will change.
Uh, but that would be something that, uh, should bring
to the parliamentary service commissioner.
They want that consider.
And just my final question, if I may.
Um, what about the increasing, um,
security expectations on
MPS electorate offices in particular?
There's, you know, we've obviously seen an up rise in, um,
disgruntlement in the public at mps
of all political stripes,
but also the expectations of constituency mps to have sort
of Fort Knox security arrangements at their electorate
offices, which can obviously,
which in some cases can be a large barrier
for people wanting to access their mps.
Well, how do we get the balance right?
Well, one, one way to get the balance, uh,
at a better place would be to change the employment laws.
Mm-hmm. Um,
and when that happens, then there can be other changes.
But right now, um, the responsibility
for people working in those offices, uh, lies, uh, firstly
with the member of Parliament.
Secondly, uh, with the, um, uh,
parliamentary Service Commission chief executive, so
as the employer under the current law,
there are some basic steps that need to be taken.
And believe me, I've, I've, uh, railed against this sort
of stuff myself in the, the past.
Mm-hmm. Uh, but I can see where the obligations lie.
And, uh, until Parliament decides
to change those obligations, then you have to act,
uh, within the law. Mm-hmm.
Right. I just welcome
Some comments from you on that, if that would be okay.
I agree. And I know that it is difficult sometimes in some
electorate offices, um,
because they're not all standard
to fit all the requirements.
Uh, but I agree with the speaker.
Some of the things that are, um,
the security measures in the office are, are
what the parliamentary service commission has approved.
But members across, uh, all, all parties have approved.
We are working with members
because we don't wanna put us, uh,
round PE on a square hole.
Uh, but I don't know if I've said it right.
But anyway, we know the other way around.
We just, we are just trying to work with the member
to ensure that the staff, uh, safe in the offices,
and we can come to a, to a good arrangement there.
Thank you. Thank you.
Just wanna bring us back to the,
it's an interesting discussion about that,
the year end review, which is what, um, what our, um,
colleagues are here to discuss.
Um, and I'm sure that, um, there is nothing in the,
in any piece of legislation that says anything other
that needs to be a safe workplace.
And there isn't specific requirements, um, as imposed
by parliamentary services listed and legislation.
Just wanna make that point. I know,
Melissa, as a supplementary
Yes. I, I just wanna
go back to a point that, um, um, Mr.
Rutherford actually raised in terms of the funding, uh,
for accommodation for mps,
which actually reflects in your budget.
Uh, one of the things that I've actually noticed, uh,
over the years, we've always actually had issues in main
centers where the rents are so high,
and the budget for mps are pretty much, you know,
the same right across the country, regardless
of whether the rent is really cheap in the regions versus
people who are actually in the main centers like Woodland
and Wellington, for example.
Rents are astronomical.
Have you considered how we can actually be more, um, fair
to mps who actually are in the main centers
who really cannot afford within their budget
to actually rent decent spaces?
Uh, yes. There's actually an item at the Parliament
Service Commission today, uh, looking at that for the
next department tree, uh, year.
That's good. Thank you.
Um, Eddie, was this a primary,
primary question? Yeah. Yeah. Glen,
Um, you introduced a, obviously, um, venue hire fee,
um, and I understand why,
and obviously we've challenged it a few times,
and you've, you've created some criteria for those,
um, who don't need to pay.
Can you just talk through how that's going,
and then in terms of the criteria you have for those
that you allow to, um, use the venue for free?
Okay. So the first point is that, uh,
the parliamentary service subsidy,
or cost, should I say, on, um, uh,
catering operations, um, events of the type that you are,
you're talking about, plus others, was, uh,
costing about a million dollars a year across, um,
that across all of the services that are provided.
So the, uh, uh, functions as well as the, um,
uh, two restaurants, uh, the cafe and the restaurant, and,
and the then bar and the first full year of
this new arrangement operating, uh,
that cost has been turned into a $74,000 surplus.
Mm-hmm. So it's, it, it was, it's not cheap.
It's do all those things. Mm-hmm.
Um, I take a view that, uh, if it's something
that a department wants to do, they should pay for it.
They shouldn't be shoving the costs onto another government
agency, which is country service.
And, um, if it's an outside body
that has commercial interest, then they pay,
if they're a registered charity, uh,
then they can be considered for, um, uh, um,
uh, that, that fee re, uh, waiver.
And the fee waiver happens a lot.
Um, it doesn't, it doesn't mean that it's not paid
because it comes out of the speaker's budget.
Yeah. Yeah. So I've found ance like that for, for
that particular, but there are some things that are,
you know, uh, re remember too, that as members
of Parliament, we all get a, a budget to operate on.
Mm-hmm. So, uh, as leaders offices, there are budgets to,
uh, to, to, you know, undertake political activity.
Um, and, well, I can't say that, can we, I
Activity that elementary
Purpose, policy nature, um, uh, always, um, you know,
particular to that particular party's position.
And I just think, uh, those
sh shoveling all the costs into a place where, uh,
no one really looks at it,
is not the right sort of thing to do.
Mm-hmm. So if, if those other budgets need to expand, well,
that's something that parliament,
the Parliament Bill can look at as well, uh,
under the Parliament Bill can look at as well.
And I, I agree. I, I agree that I think, you know,
you've done the right thing in terms of outside
companies paying to use the facilities.
And, um, and I guess, would you consider putting in a,
an actual speaker's rule
or anything that we can have real clarity on what can
and can't be considered? Yeah.
Look, I'm trying to develop That, but,
But if you, I think there needs to be some area
of discretion, because I, I don't wanna name it,
but there are some charities who I would not want
to have having functions here. Um, is
It, can I see there's that, my concern,
therefore, is it's, obviously, it's,
which I know you are the speaker, so it's your choice.
You're the landlord. But does that crack an issue
that it's whoever's the speaker,
they have their own lens on things and
Well, that's what, that's why I'm trying to get at, uh,
uh, something that is going to be in, uh,
on speaker's rulings
or, um, just, uh, a circulated set
of rules that makes it easy to, um, to apply.
Okay,
Andy? Yeah. Um,
look, you talked, um, about the, the pressure
that there's, uh, if there is on the service, uh,
and I just wondered what thought there has been to how
that pressure might be reduced in some ways
to about sort rubber banding stretch and stretch
and stretch until ditch deep breaks.
How that might be, uh, procedurally reduced.
Uh, some of the things that, um, you know,
you sometimes look at some of the bills that go through
and think, well, there's three or four doing something
broadly similar, but they have to be three or four.
'cause that's the way the system works,
should make the system much more efficient.
Because I'm looking at the Clark here
and saying, you know, are ways in which we could actually
reduce the workload by improved by changing the procedure.
That might be a standing orders
or business committee type, uh, thing.
But, uh, that might assist, uh, the service
Standing orders always looks at.
Um, so the process
for the standing orders review started a little
earlier in this parliament.
And, um, uh,
but it always looks at, um, those sorts of things with David
or comment further, I think, um, yeah, I,
I'll, um,
Yeah. Well, I think, I think one
of the things that, um,
may be indicating is that, that the rules
that a bill must relate to single subject area Yeah.
Do mean that if you have pieces
of policy developed over a period of time, um,
in the same broad area, um, there's either, there,
there's not always the ability to wait until all
of those are together and put in one bill,
because if it doesn't relate to one subject area, um,
or it's not a permissible sort of omnibus bill relates
to a Singapore policy,
and you do end up with multiple pieces
of legislation in the same subject area.
So there are, there are things that can be done about that.
One of them is, I think, is in the policy development space,
is about ensuring that all the work in an area is done
before a bill is, uh, proposed and,
and the policy decisions finalized.
Um, the other one is looking at the rules
around single subject areas.
And one of the things that I proposed in my submission
to the Standing Waters Committee is that
that could be relaxed a bit in situations where, um,
they've been, uh, you know, public consultation
and engagement on a bill before is introduced so that, uh,
they government introducing to shorts of good shape.
So there are, there are, you know, levers
that can be pulled to, to do that.
The other lever, I think that's been talked about a bit, um,
around the volume of submissions is perhaps there's a
parallel channel where members of the public are able
to just indicate support
or opposition to a bill, maybe make a comment about it,
but they don't have to go down the formal submission path,
which might mean that submissions channel is a more
substantive one, and they could be the things
that committees focus on hearing.
Um, but people who simply want to have their say in a,
you know, through a simpler channel, could also do that.
And how big are those kind of changes?
How big a difference would they make to your work,
your, your team's workload?
It's, it's difficult to know how, how they'd be picked up.
Um, but it would certainly, I mean,
if there are a smaller number of more details
and substantial submissions, um, that,
that certainly would make a difference to the speed
with which we can process and get into committees.
This one may concern that committees get them as quickly
as possible so they can start hearing them
and have as much time as possible to digest them.
Can I ask a completely different question?
I, um, unless you've got out somebody
else, I will let you in.
This, in this instance, it's, it's, it's two primaries
behind you, but you've got, you've got the floor's.
It's a fairly innocuous one. It's just, um, assuming
that the, going back to the buildings, assuming
that the building, um, uh, doesn't,
that the library building does not need a significant, um,
investment at all.
So there's $90 million or something of that order
of magnitude, which is, uh, available.
What's the, what's the next plan that, uh, you would use
that for as part of the, the precinct development?
Does it allow the, the speeding up
of the development elsewhere?
Um, what's, what's the thinking going on there?
Well, it will cost, um, some millions because it,
I aware of that. Yep.
Gotta have it in a state
that people are comfortable being in there.
Um, but look, there's, there are other, uh, areas
of parliament that are empty.
Uh, if you look at the, uh,
what was the Old Press Gallery building that the
brutalist piece of architecture sitting on top of the
B beehive car park and swimming wall.
Oh, yeah. Um, that, that, uh,
something has to be done with that.
It's either gotta be demolished and gone or, um, uh,
or brought up to speed.
Uh, if it was, if it would have been, uh,
brought up to standard under the, the old code that the,
the, you know, 2020 code, um,
it would've been impossible to use it.
'cause you'd had cross uh,
cross steel arrangements. Well, you
Talk about the beehive vax,
But now the annex that Yeah, yeah.
All the way through it. Yeah. You'd also had to, um, pile
underneath it, uh, to quite some depth to prop it up.
And those would've had to be braced as well.
So it was a, it was a completely impractical proposition.
Um, uh, yet the, um, what do they called here
to New Zealand was saying, no, you can't do any of that.
'cause it's a fine piece of brutalist architecture
that should be left untouched.
Um, now I don't want to be too, uh, pointed,
given the personnel sitting around the table.
But Wellton City Council haven't been at all council, uh,
parliament and, uh, operating
Under the law. I'm sure
Operating, operating under the law, paying
Rapes might help. One way
Of saying, we make up the law
and we decide what the law actually means.
And I think that's, uh, that's an ongoing problem,
but, you know, soon to be solved.
Mm. Thank you, Celia.
Um, thank you. I will not go into, um, um,
the relationship with Team Council
in Parliament at the moment.
Um, I was really interested in following on from the work
that's been done with Torito, um, youth Engagement,
youth Parliament songs, all, um, good.
But if you are looking, looking at the report on, um,
schools, either the regions that were visited
with the education outreach either had no schools
or fewer than 2% Visit Parliament.
And I wondered when the last discussion was about
potentially having a Canberra type visit,
where you would expect all schools
and that maybe at intermediate level,
maybe a different age group, um, to
visit the capital.
And obviously Parliament
and a number of other institutions like Topa,
national Portrait Gallery and whatever suited that school
and, and whether there had been any budgeting, um,
for such a program looked at,
Uh, firstly, the Australian program is not
as good as they make out.
Uh, the actual number of schools who get
to Canberra is very, very low, um, considering the size
of the population in total number of schools.
Uh, so it doesn't work anywhere near to the idea
that all school students get to go to Canberra.
It's a very low percentage.
I think it's below 10% actually is quite
surprisingly though.
Mm-hmm. Um, second thing is, um, I'm not a great fan
that is Parliament.
'cause it is an expensive exercise
for a very small number of people.
And it doesn't reach the, the wider group of people that,
uh, uh, wider group of young people.
And perhaps it could for the same ship.
Uh, but again, it's one of those things
that's been inside the budget.
It's, uh, uh, it's had no increase in funding this year.
In fact, we just didn't, just couldn't do it.
Um, that's why it was paid back.
And Ministry of Youth, uh,
weren't very prepared to pay for much either.
So that is expected Parliament to pay for it, which, um, is,
you know, ongoing problem.
Uh, and so, uh, once there's a a, you know,
parliament determines its own funding, then those sorts
of things can be more considered.
But it would be, uh, a horrifically expensive exercise
to bring, uh, every young child from a secondary school,
from a, uh, an intermediate school
or a secret school, whatever we decided to pitch at, uh,
to Wellington for a, for a program.
So, uh, it, it's not on the cards at the moment.
Thank you, Glen.
Uh, yeah, coming back, we did talk
about properties earlier.
Um, and looking at the, looking back in terms
of speakers, directions
and acts that are required to be, um, observed
that there's only a 67% of the a hundred percent target of,
um, eco offices, um, up to security standard.
Um, and I understand what you talked about at the start,
that, you know, you are only working within the
money that you actually have.
Can someone just comment on,
'cause that to me seems like a, a challenging number, uh,
in terms of safety and security for our staff and members.
It is, but then you've got also members who, um, uh,
not operate offices who operate periodically
from other locations with staff, uh,
and advertise venues where there's no security at all.
So it's, it's a, a difficult one.
What happens at the moment,
and Brad will give you some numbers,
but is that every effort is made to, uh, comply
with the requirements of an employer, people, uh,
keeping them safe in the workplace. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. It is, it is a low number.
Um, as I said, we work with members to make sure that the,
um, critical safeguards can be applied to the office.
Um, and sometimes I realize that it's not possible
because of the office.
Um, uh, so as the speaker said,
it's a shared responsibility
between the member and the service.
We can't go into a member's office
and demand that the critical, um, uh,
security safeguards are adhered to.
Uh, so we just need to work with the members
and see how we can get that number up. Mm.
And on that, in terms of, uh, you know, as the chief deal
with security issues and, and events,
and we now have a new team in Parliament
that's been stood up around monitoring those events.
And, you know, so Thank you. Turning up. But again, Mr.
Speaker and, you know, into the executive, um, have we had
to cut corners in other places to be able
to fund these services?
Uh, you, you know, however we managed to do it,
and thank you that you have
Well, just taking a million dollars out
of the co catering costs Yeah.
Gives you a lot of flexibility. Mm-hmm.
And there's been one
or two other places like that where, uh,
some costs have been reduced.
But, um, I, I don't think overall service has gone.
And we did get some funding in the previous, um, uh,
budget for, for that purpose.
Uh, and also to harden the, uh, the, the, uh, security
around select committees, select Committee Window.
Thank you, Tom.
Um, Mr.
Speaker, keen to get your gauge on the
Clerk of the House
and parliamentary service making submissions
to select committees on legislation.
Has that been a practice that has good for many, many years?
I believe so. Okay.
Um, and is it on the implications that that piece
of legislation would've
to the day-to-day operations of Parliament, or
What, sorry, say that Again?
Is it on the, would it be your expectation that
that should just be on the implications that that piece
of legislation would've
to the day-to-day operations of Parliament?
Or should it be broader than that?
Uh, would, well, I don't think you could come out
with a hard and fast dis
or no on that would depend entirely on
what the legislation was.
And, um, when you say, uh, effects on Parliament,
the day-to-day operation of Parliament, um,
some bills would change the way in which, um,
processes might be dealt with,
in which case you would expect Clark
to have a few. Do you wanna make a comment
On that?
Uh, I, I think the comment I've made, uh,
in select committees, I won't even ask that question,
which is, uh, it is one of my statutory functions
to provide advice to parliament on, uh,
parliamentary procedure and law.
Uh, and, and yet has been a, a practice of my predecessors,
certainly going back to the 1980s, to, to make submissions
to committees when they think it's appropriate.
Um, my practice is to share that submission with,
with the speaker once I've made it.
But because I exercise those functions independently
of the speaker, I don't check it off before I send it in.
Tim, Tim's got an example he might want
To raise.
Thank you. Welcome.
Oh, well, ones, we talked about committee, I think was,
uh, the Parliament Workforce Bill, wasn't it?
I think is the one that you, are you
The, it was the public service, the public
Bill? No, that was on
the long Inside briefing, I think was the,
I'm thinking of the, uh, defense Workforce bill,
which was the one which changed that. Oh,
Yes. You
know, parliament, uh,
parliamentary per from the minister work went from
14 days to 30 days.
So it had the same, the same oversight, the same process
that just could extend through, for example, the Christmas,
the Christmas break, that the other one was the
long term insight on that aspect of the
Public Service Amendment.
Service amendment. Yeah.
And in that instance that, um, my, my submission pointed out
that a paper that was
provided to Parliament under the standing orders, um,
would no longer be available.
And that's something the committee should think about.
So I think that's, you know, very clearly connected
to parliamentary procedure.
Yes. And I found that submission to be very helpful.
Mm-hmm. And elucidating in terms
of Parliament discretionary role with those briefings,
any further s on that?
No. Okay. Good.
Um, I just wanna come back to the strategic contentions,
and I think it's good to see, um,
obviously working together across, um, both sectors.
And just, just any comments on how, you know,
it's a year into it, how that is going in terms of
how you've set things up and are you seeing it more
streamlined and working better for our little d democracy?
Well, I, I think so.
I mean, one of the things for the office is
that we are the recipient of a lot
of services from the parliamentary service
as our members and parties.
Um, because we also occupy these premises.
And we're really hard to eliminate duplication.
Um, both, you know, partly it's not efficient,
it's not a good use of taxpayer money, but also
because it's far better for our agencies
to focus on the things we're good at.
Um, in our case, supporting the house and committees
and working on parliamentary engagement.
And the parliamentary service provides a
wider range of functions.
And, you know, many of those support us.
So I think it, it's ongoing.
We'll, we'll always look at, you know,
are there more things we can do?
The most recent example was shifting funding
that we were using to purchase ICT
services from the parliamentary service.
Mm-hmm. In the last budget, actually, just
to the parliamentary service,
since we're not gonna buy those,
those services from anyone else.
Anyway. So it's an ongoing piece of work,
but I think it, it is important we,
we don't duplicate services.
That wasn't the case when Ralph and I came into our roles.
And, um, it is something we both agreed to focus on.
Yeah. We've worked really hard in making that happen.
Uh, both agencies work for, say, purpose, which is, uh,
helping Parliament, helping with democracy.
And before we came into these roles, two H seem
to be working in different ways.
And I think that's been one of, uh,
a, a, a story of success.
We compliment each other, the things
that we do for each other.
Uh, and I think that's a result of that, uh,
parliament has benefited.
Mm-hmm. Any, Aaron, in terms of your shared, um,
performance frameworks
and your shared outcomes, are you, are you achieving those?
Um, well, I, I think the reporting,
the annual report will show in, in most cases, yes.
And in some, no, and in some, um,
although the performance measure exists, the event
that we measure hasn't yet happened.
There's a few there about contributing
to standing orders review, for example.
Mm-hmm. So those haven't occurred yet.
But yeah, I mean, I think generally we, we are,
I would also say we do set like high performance measures.
It's been raised quite a lot
of the offices are a hundred percent.
And although that is, um, you know, extremely optimistic,
they are just things that you couldn't realistically say.
It's okay that our advice is right 90% of the time,
or we mostly get bills right when we certify em.
But not always just, it just has to be like that.
But we do make a rod for our own
backs to an extent there as well.
'cause you know, if you make one mistake out of vetting tens
of thousands of questions, you've gotta
report it. But that's all right.
Mm-hmm. And the way we set the standards are the, uh,
based on feedback we've received from members.
Um, so we, we hear through different avenues from Mr.
Speaker, uh, what are the things that members expect?
And that's how we set up the standard.
Sometimes the standard doesn't, um, uh, fit all members,
but we, we can look at the best information we, we can.
And I think we are working hard to, to achieve those.
Mm. WhatsApp I just finally, in terms of, um, crossover
with staff, does that happen in example
of when submissions close on a bill
and obviously the, the system's heaving, um,
or when they, those bills have to,
those submissions have to be assessed, et cetera.
Has that, has that, have you been able to streamline
that in terms of working together
and having a strategic plan?
Yeah, they, there've been, um,
staff from the parliamentary service, uh,
do often help the office in times of peak workload.
Um, and in a variety of areas.
Some of the Chamber staff, um, support for select committees
as well, um, at times.
Um, and obviously the ongoing support, research support
that the library provides to secretaries.
And, and does that take away from the other work
or that's just how you, you
just mold it together when you have to.
'cause it's of the pressure at different times.
That's how it is. And when you, when you, uh, run agencies
that don't have a lot of staff, yeah.
Uh, people trip triple themselves
to just make sure that they fit everything.
But, but as it's worked well,
and as, uh, David said,
we've had really good engagement scores over the past few
years, so something's working.
Thank You. Celia.
I just thought it was appropriate on today
with the disability strategy launching to, um, acknowledge
that you received the accessibility tick.
Um, and that's a great step forward.
And, uh,
there was a question in the general written questions
to all our agencies about, um, accessibility,
but I wanted to hone it down on the plain
English issue.
Um, earlier this year, um, the Plain English
Act was repealed.
Most agencies had given, um, assurance is
that they would still be in effect during their
utmost to be clear and use plain language.
And I just wondered if you had any comments as to, um,
how you are doing that?
I think the first thing is that that act didn't apply
to the parliamentary agencies
because we're not part of the public service.
Um, and it, it is our approach to try
and communicate in plain language.
Obviously some of the work we do for, uh, committees
and in the house, there are some technical terms.
But when we're trying to engage with the public, we try
and do that in a, in a, you know,
if a reasonably straightforward way
because we wanna support public engagement
and we, you know, that is working.
Um, but if there's more we can do to make more success,
you know, we always do want to do that. Yeah.
Thank you. Uh, Melissa, sorry, she hit a up on.
Oh, that's okay. I just wanted
to talk about your strategy in terms
of diversity and inclusion.
Uh, in your statements you actually talk about
how you actually engage a lot
and the, uh, the committee actually, you know, engage
with Neurodiverse communities and whatever.
And I, it was interesting for me to actually see the number
of, uh, and the age spread of the staff in parliament,
but I'm, I'm looking at the ethnicity, um, spread
of the parliamentary staff.
Um, are you happy with the percentages of the diversity
that is actually included in the population,
Uh, before the office of the clerk?
I think, uh, a couple of comments I'd make is, one is
that we don't require staff to tell us their ethnicity.
So we don't know for about 18 to 20%, uh, what it is.
'cause it's up to them. Uh,
what they tell us is always up to them.
Um, we always, you know, our, our, we are never short
of applicants and we always want
to recruit the person best suited for the job.
Um, I would like our workforce to, um,
I suppose be representative and,
and look like New Zealand, um, more like the house does.
Um, but, um, you know, we've always got to recruit the,
the best person that we get for any job.
What I want to make sure is
that we're not missing out on talented people
because some section society are, are not applying
or you know, we're not reaching.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. So in that, in that sense, are you actively
making communities who are different
minority populations aware
that there are opportunities for them?
Like you're reaching out to the Neurodiverse community?
No. No, you're not. Okay.
Uh, in ethnicity, um, um, graph
as we call it, uh, there is other ethnicity
apart from Asian, European, Maori, Mila Pacific people.
So what is the other ethnicity?
I thought Asian, European, Maori,
Meer Pacific peoples would cover the all over the world.
It, it does seem like a good spread.
Well, as I say, because it is a, a self-identification.
If people choose something that isn't one
of those categories that would go in there.
Like what? Well, I don't know.
Because I don't dunno what people choose.
I'm not, I'm not there when they choose.
No. So who actually this,
could someone actually come back to me as to Yeah.
What other ethnicity is that is not, it doesn't fit.
It's a self choice. I know,
but it doesn't fit into Asian,
European male Maori Mala Pacific people.
Well, yeah.
Um, we might be able to, you might be able to come back
to Melissa on that with, um, just run out of time.
I'm very curious. Okay.
Um, but thank you, thank you all very much
for joining us today, um, and for answering our questions.
No,
I talk administration.
Yes. That's what I said. Welcome, welcome back, uh,
to Governance and Administration Committee.
Uh, thank you very much for joining us
for our annual review hearing.
Um, nice to see you again.
Um, we, uh, have received the annual report
and just wanted to give you the opportunity
to make some comments on, on that, uh, before we start.
And then we'll head into questions
from committee members. So,
Uh, thank you and thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
be here and be scrutinized, uh, with, uh, Bridget Houston,
who is, uh, deputy Ombudsman.
Uh, Emily Leach, who is the chief, uh, assistant ombudsman,
senior Assistant Ombudsman, uh,
and f uh,
who is our, uh, CFO.
So between all of us,
I think we hopefully can answer the questions,
uh, that you may have.
Uh, in terms of the, uh, year, uh, in review, uh,
clearly it was a year of transition, uh, a year
of transition between the leadership of osha, uh,
in the office, uh, to my, uh, joining the office
and looking at how we might, uh,
most successfully move forward.
It's been a year in which we have identified successfully
a range of strategic priorities
and are working hard to implement, uh,
and make progress against those priorities.
Uh, those priorities are to focus on timeliness, uh,
to focus on technology, uh,
as an efficiency tool predominantly, uh,
to focus on our talent, uh,
and unleashing our talent, uh, in
what has been a reasonably, uh, controlled, hierarchical
and quite closely managed, uh, environment, uh,
to date, a focus on community engagement.
Uh, because obviously the awareness
of this office is critically important, uh, to the country.
Uh, and as you will have seen in the, uh, reports,
awareness is not where we would like it to be, uh,
particularly in some key, uh, demographics, uh,
in relating both to Maori, uh, and to Asian communities.
And so we are working hard in that space.
And then finally, we are focused very much on impact.
Uh, and, uh, we've got a project
and effectiveness project, uh, which is underway now, uh,
which is engaging with, uh, a wide range of stakeholders,
including, uh, members of parliament, uh,
to define more clearly
what a well-working ombudsman's office actually, um,
you know, we should measure, uh, to determine our success.
Uh, and I think over the next year you'll see that flow
through into the, uh, SSP, um, metrics
and things of that kind.
So a year of transition, a year now of focus, uh,
some real progress against the areas of focus.
Uh, and in my view, we are well positioned, uh,
for the years ahead.
Thank you very much. We do have some
more questions from committee members. Start with
Fani. Uh, thank
you Madam Chair,
and thank you me very much for, uh,
being in front of us today.
I think it's a pleasure to scrutinize an office
that has a particular appreciation for scrutiny.
Um, so thank you for the work of your team.
Um, my first question is in regards to timeliness. Yes.
Um, so I have a particular concern that about the conflation
of facts in terms of the, um, potential underspend as well
as the, uh, lack of meeting that target in terms
of the three month period to respond to complaints.
So could you give us some information about what's
been done to address that? Yes,
I can. As I said,
that was the first of the priority areas
because we shared that concern.
Uh, put simply if our reports are delayed too long
or the information requested is not
provided, uh, in a timely way, uh, then often it is out.
There's no use, uh, to the, uh, complainant, uh,
or to the person who is requesting that information.
So what have we done? Uh,
we've put a real focus, uh, in that area.
We've set some targets in that area.
And what I can tell you, uh, is that
as act the 1st of December, so that's what this week, uh,
our, uh, clearance rates in relation to, uh, complaints,
and that's across both OI
and OA complaints, uh,
is running at 70.5% in three months, uh,
uh, closure in three months.
And that's up from 52.6% last year.
And as you'll know, that is ahead of that target, uh,
that you have referred to.
And there are a range of things that we've done.
I mean, obviously we've got a focus on it,
and that does make a big difference.
We've set some targets that makes a difference.
We're also using, um, early resolution techniques, uh,
more actively in these processes.
And what that means is that we've got specialist teams, uh,
who are picking up the phone, who are talking to people,
rather than going through what I regard
as more compliance based processes.
Uh, and are, and as a consequence of doing that,
and some of that sort
of eng engage early engagement are making real progress on
getting what might have otherwise been a month long
or two month long process, uh,
contracted into very much shorter time periods.
The end result of all of that, uh, is that we are seeing,
uh, complaints dealt with more quickly,
resolved more quickly, uh,
and information being put in the hands of people
that have requested it, or at least decisions made,
and in general, information flowing from those decisions
made more quickly than it was previously.
That's supplementary. Thank you for that.
It's really good to know that that's improving.
Um, I was just wondering, on page 1 0 6 of the report, um,
there's a response to the survey question which says
that 36% of complainants were satisfied with the service.
That's the actuals for 24 25.
Is that related to timeliness
or are there other, what's the breakdown of that?
Uh, that, that is in part related to timeliness?
Um, sometimes people aren't satisfied with the service
because they don't like the answer.
Uh, so that's, that, that also impacts, uh, that number.
Uh, but also sometimes it's about the complexity of, uh,
finding us and submitting to us, uh,
be a particular complaint, uh,
which is an area in which we think that, uh, for example,
technology, uh, might be able to help us, uh,
quite a lot going forward.
So those are the sorts of factors
that I think are reflected in that number.
Okay, thank you. And just one other supplementary,
is there a connection between the budget spend, uh,
projected and improving that timeliness issue?
Well, uh, yes.
In that, in that, uh, we, uh, well, let me come back.
The answer is that we, most of what we have done to date
hasn't cost anything.
Uh, it's been about focus and reorganization
and resetting some of the delegations
and those sorts of things.
Uh, moving forward, as the number of complaints continues
to rise, we are going to need to invest in technology,
uh, to support us.
And part of that was the point I was just making about the
front end and making it easier for, for people
to engage with us.
And we are also probably going to need to continue
to expand our numbers,
although I don't believe that a model that simply says,
each year we come down
and say, our, our percentage of, uh,
complaints has gone up X amount and
therefore we need y more people, uh,
is a sustainable model given the current pressures
that are confronting parliament
across lots and lots of areas.
So we are very conscious of that.
Uh, we are working hard
to be more efficient without adding head count.
Uh, and, uh, we are hoping, we're not hoping, we believe
that technology plays a part in that plays, as does the new,
uh, cultural culture that we are creating
and, uh, processes that we're putting in place. Thank
You.
Thanks, Andy.
Uh, yeah, look, just I'm going to, um, uh, the issue,
you are obviously prioritizing, um, things which you, uh,
complaints which you see as urgent.
Are there also, is there any prioritization process in terms
of looking at this, the, the significance
or scale of the issues that people are raising?
'cause that's something that doesn't really come through.
Yes, indeed. Both. Both, both.
Uh, so it's both, uh, in terms of urgency
and impact would be the two that, I mean, there's, there's
language that's used, but it's urgency
and impact, and you are right.
Uh, that, um, uh, in some instances, uh,
you are looking at cases, uh, you are prioritizing cases
because of the wider impacts that that case might have
across a liberty or across the country.
Yeah. Good. Um,
and do you, do you also track having done an investigation
into a complaint, do you track the,
um, the results of those?
In other words, we, we, the actions
of the office in responding to
that complaint result in the change in behavior?
Because I know that one of the things
that Peter Bosier talked about was, yeah, some frustration
with one particular government agency,
which was very slow on changing.
But do you look at, do you look at that
and then track that and say, actually, okay,
So we've made a difference here, here and here. Yep.
Uh, yes is the short answer to that.
And often we ask the agency to report back
to us on a regular basis, uh, in terms
of the progress they're making against the
recommendations that have been made.
Uh, but in the change process
that we are currently consulting,
and you will have seen that referred to in the, uh, uh,
in the material, uh, we're looking actually
to consolidate our work around both the dr the crafting
of recommendations and the monitoring of recommendations
and performance against those recommendations
in a specific team.
Now that's in consultations I might flex a little in terms
of feedback and things like that,
but it goes precisely to your point, uh, that we need to be,
uh, effectively ensuring that the recommendations
that are made, which are accepted
by agencies almost universally are actually then delivered
against by agencies.
Good. Thank you, Tim.
Um, morning, um, le leaving aside the,
the timeliness issue that was addressed
before, I, I note that the number of complaints
or contacts that have been resolved is up
by 30% in the, in the report.
Can you tell me, sometimes the numbers are a bit hard
to understand 'cause it gets broken down into the total
number of completed complaints.
It has the number of OAA complaints completed,
OAA complaints and also the local government ones.
So that 30%, what is that based on?
30, the 30%, The 30% increasing from,
So that, so that is the total number of complaints,
Right. Uh, that
have been completed in the course
of that year. Mm-hmm.
So that's like that 16,000 I think it was
Yes. With
contacts. That's right. Yeah,
Because the, I I noticed the previous year was about 13
and half thousand.
So I, am I looking at the right numbers?
So that's, so that's the total
and next rank. Okay.
So the, the, uh, previous year,
so 2324 was,
the total was 6,489,
and that was broken down between the OIA
and laima, uh, legislation of 2,127.
The official information, the Ombudsman Act, sorry, um, at,
uh, 4,142
and 220 for PDA
and then in 20 24, 25, if I just run through those Yeah.
For you. Uh, what we're talking about is in the OI
and LAIMA space, 2,856, uh,
in the, um, OA space 5,302,
uh, and in the PDA space 280, which takes you
to the 8,438.
So it's the total without the OA complaints completed.
And, and, and, and when you go,
That does, that does have the OA complaints in it
Because the number in your annual report total is
16,144 when you,
But that, but I think if, if that's the number,
just take me to the page.
But that will include contacts.
Yeah. That includes inquiries,
Inquiries and contacts is just inquiries that are made
to the office and often just dealt with on the phone,
um, in that process.
Okay. That, that, that's helpful.
And I might come, come back to
that at the end once I've gone through,
because clearly the numbers are slightly different.
Sure. If, if we just go to the big picture,
and this is an answer I couldn't quite get outta your
predecessor, but I feel like you've got a bit more
of a handle on, if I won the clock back, say 10 years.
Yeah. Um, the budget today is about four
and a half times what it was back then.
The staff numbers are almost four times
what they were back then.
The, I mean, back then they completed, this was 13,000
complaints probably and contacts.
But if you look at just the number of, um,
complaints completed, it's,
it's not four and a half times bigger.
No. Can can you give us some, some context as to why,
you know, four times as many people doesn't mean four times
as much work completed?
Sure. So, so the, the key message is
that Parliament has asked us to take on new jurisdictions,
uh, and new activities over the course of that 10 years.
And so what I'm talking about there is our opca
jurisdiction, uh, which is the optional protocol,
um, against torture.
Uh, and, uh, in relation to that jurisdiction,
we have a responsibility to visit
and scrutinize places of detention across the country.
There are about 420 of them.
Uh, they range from dementia units to, uh, secure units
for people with disability, uh, to prisons.
Uh, there's a wide range of work,
and we have a, a team who travel
to make those visits on an announced
and unannounced basis, uh, to ensure, uh, that people
who are living in those circumstances
are being properly treated in accordance with both national
and international.
Uh, the second area that has developed
and has grown very dramatically, uh, is in the,
um, PDA space.
So the protective disclosures, protected disclosures,
and you've seen that, uh, in some of the numbers.
Uh, and then in work we've done
around proactive interventions
and that space where we are of our own motion, uh, deciding
that we will go and investigate areas
where we are seeing trends in the complaints data generally,
um, which enable us to, to identify issues and go
and address them, uh, proactively.
Uh, I, I, they're not always that character.
In fact, the, the one that, uh,
my predecessor did most recently would be in relation
to the, uh, cyclone Gabriel, um, inquiry.
So, so the short point, uh, Tim in relation to that is
that if you look at our funding,
about 51% is in relation to complaints.
That's the, the traditional complaints.
Um, stuff, uh, 24% goes to the opca,
um, activity.
Uh, about 8% goes to proactive interventions.
Uh, and, and then about 11% goes to the PDA,
and I've missed one, which was disability rights,
which I shouldn't have missed 'cause they launched the
disability, uh, strategy this morning.
Uh, so, uh, so, uh, we,
we also have a monitoring function in relation
to disability rights,
and of course, a monitoring function in relation to, um,
and so those are also additional
jurisdictions that have been added.
And I mean, that's a, thank you.
That's a helpful explanation.
Um, and, and I don't mean to prolong this, I we, with sort
of one eye to the future, as we look at the, the year
that's been what, what are you expecting, you know, is,
uh, how do, how do I word this like that, that we,
we see a trend over 10 years of just escalating staff,
escalating budgets.
I understand the additional responsibilities, but,
but what does that mean for the future?
Does that mean that more money means more
complaints resolved?
Does it mean more timeliness,
or does it mean more capacity to look at these, uh,
bigger picture issues, the proactive work
that you've just articulated?
Um, and, and,
and it kind of speaks to maybe the reasons that some
of the things you've said, you're not gonna investigate
that if they just using up capacity that could be used
for other things in the context
of a budget in any case. So,
So, so I think what I, what I'd say to you is
that we are going to make our complaints management process,
which is our core, uh, function as efficient
as we possibly can.
Uh, and I think there's work, uh, that still can be done in
that space, um,
in just our organizational structures and culture.
But there's also, obviously work that could be done
with technology, uh,
and, uh, you know, simple processes like, uh, putting, um,
some sort of chat bot
or something into your website, uh, which many ombudsman
around the world have, have done, um, can help people
craft their complaints in a more precise way,
which enables them, when they arrive at the, at the desk
of one of our, um, uh, um, investigators
or early, um, action investigators,
uh, they're ready to go.
And so we don't have a lot of pre-work that we have to do.
We don't have to be ringing the complainant checking
everything and all that sort of stuff.
So I think, I think there's a lot more efficiency we can get
there, and we are doing our best
to constrain headcount growth in that space.
I think that you just, just gimme be two seconds.
Is that all right? Sure. Um, just, just the, the, the point
that you are making, which I think is a very good one, is
that the real impact of the office, yes, we can do
that in terms of individual complaints
and manage those well, but the real impact
of the office comes when we can identify systemic issues
from those, that complaint data,
and then through a proactive intervention of some kind,
actually deliver, uh, a systemic, uh, review
and recommendations
that will change the system rather than just change
one particular complaint.
So yes, I do believe we are going to do more of that work.
And yes, I believe at various points we'll probably be
talking to you about how we best support that work.
And, and do you fi final one thing, Madam Chair.
Do you, are you able to give us a sense of how many
of these complaints actually are upheld?
How many are legitimate? Are we seeing explained number
of complaints because people find it easy,
and I notice a lot of government departments now that,
for example, the Defense Force said, oh, well,
if you put a comment on Facebook that's treated
as an official information Act request,
and other departments don't, it seems crazy to me.
Absolutely insane. Yeah.
Um, but it becomes so easy to put this in
and then people have an expectation.
Are you finding an escalation in complaints is
because they're well founded,
or is it just that people are more likely
'cause it's easy now to reach out to ombudsman?
Uh, many of the complaints are well founded.
Uh, so, so, you know, the office exists to assist people
who have legitimate complaints, uh, to,
um, work out whether or not they're, they're real or not,
and what, what should happen
as a consequence if they are real.
So many of them are. Uh,
but it is fair to say to your point,
that there has been an increase in the number of people
who are using, uh, our processes, um, as they are, you know,
we're seeing in other, other parts of the system, uh, really
as a mechanism to, uh, either promote a particular view
that they hold deeply and sincerely,
but perhaps misguidedly, uh,
or, uh, with a purpose, which is probably
to put pressure on the system.
Uh, and, uh, certainly one of the things
that we have done in the last, uh, period is
to look very hard at the way in which the frivolous
and vexatious provisions, uh,
of the official Information Act are being used,
which is often they wouldn't,
because the common law thresholds for
that particular provision are quite high.
But in my view, uh, given what's happening with technology,
given how society is moving, uh, it's important
that we do have another think about the settings for
that particular provision, uh,
and that we ensure that, you know, uh, common law decisions
that were taken well
before, some of the technologies
that we are currently confronting and,
and community that we are currently confronting, um,
remain relevant and appropriate.
So we are having a good look at that.
Thank you. Thank you, Fania.
Uh, thank you. Um, I just wanted
to finish off on performance measures,
and we've talked about delay,
but I know that the office has achieved 37 out of 54,
so 69 on my calculation percentage
of the performance measures.
Um, and I want to wonder if you could speak
to the other measures
and what's been done in terms
of improving performance on those?
Um, depends which other me measures you would like.
So there's, there's many measures.
Um, I can talk to them e each of them,
but, uh, that might not be the most.
So there's, so what would you like
Perhaps the impact driven measures?
Lemme just find I
Page 1 0 1. Thank you.
Right. Okay.
So, um, let me just run through the impact measures.
I thought that that suit, so the first is, uh, members
of public who are aware of the official information,
uh, legislation.
That's an important metric for the office,
and it's one that you'll have heard me say.
Uh, community engagement is a critical component, uh, of,
of my, of the priority areas that we have set.
That's one of the priority areas,
and that is with this particular ambition
of raising that metric.
Uh, and so at the moment, as you see for 24, 25,
it struck at 46%.
Uh, the target that we are looking for, there was 49,
but the actual in 23.4 was 43.
So we've got a lot of work to do in that space.
And part of that is in, uh, improving the website.
Part of it, as I've said, is improving the technology
and part of it, uh, is in getting out into the community.
Yeah. Uh, and making sure that the office is visible.
But probably the ones in particular concern
for me are the ones related to, um,
New Zealand being free from torture
and ill treatment where we rate fear
and New Zealand public able
to participate in government also 6.4 fear, um,
and high trust in the public sector
where the goal is 60% higher and we are falling below.
So those three,
Yeah. So,
uh, you'll have seen the framework for all of our,
our metrics in the, in the annual report of at page 14,
which starts with the apex of, uh, people are treated fairly
and then talks into what we are trying to achieve in terms
of high public trust, in government,
people's rights protected, et cetera, et cetera.
As we move down, uh, the effectiveness project
that we are currently undertaking, which I've referred to,
uh, is designed to try
and find metrics that better align our
activity, our engagement,
and what we do with those high level,
uh, outcomes.
Because at one level, while I can, while,
while I could give you a very compelling, I hope, uh, uh,
argument to say that the work we do absolutely
translates into, uh, us being, uh,
identified in the transparency index for as,
as whatever ranking country.
In fact, being able to draw
that at a statistical level in a,
in a robust statistical way is very, very difficult to do,
uh, to draw a correlation between the actual work
of the office and that particular outcome.
So those are high level metrics which we monitor
and which we think are critically important for this country
and for its place in the world.
So, so, uh, we believe transparency is important, uh,
in the country, not just to drive, uh, you know, confidence,
uh, in, in government
and in decision making of government, uh,
but also to ensure, uh, appropriate corruption free,
um, environment for, uh, citizens and,
and the way in which we operate, uh, in the country.
So there are, there are multiple benefits.
My point to you is simply that the work we're doing now is
to try and firm up the correlation between the work we do
and these outcomes, because at the moment,
it's not as clear as I would like it to be. Mm-hmm.
And supplementary, um, my sense is
that the work on the front end is often fantastic.
And, um, one example of that is your work looking at prisons
and the recommendations you made in the per report.
Mm-hmm. Um, we had corrections in front of us yesterday
who made the statement that they were not going
to action the recommendation to shut down the unit, um,
and instead are making a set
of changes over a period of time.
I wonder if there's a role for the office to play in terms
of responding to that refusal, which seems
to me fairly serious given that rating on torture
and treatment.
Yeah, I, I, I think, uh,
the Peru report raised a lot of issues.
I mean, the, the, the primary issues apart from Peter's
conclusion that the, uh, the fundamental design of
that particular directorate, uh, was inappropriate.
Uh, the fundamental issues
that he was talking about are related not simply
to the treatment of prisoners,
but the uncertainty of the process by which prisoners get,
um, uh, incarcerated in the Peru facility,
and the uncertainty of the process by which they might get,
come out of the Peru facility.
Uh, and those sorts of factors of clarity around who gets in
and how and who comes out
and when are really important when you go
and talk to, uh, the prisoners who are in there.
Uh, and I did that and, uh, as part
of informing myself about that particular, uh, facility,
uh, and, uh, those are the sorts of issues
that the prisoners that we spoke to
or that I spoke to, um, uh, were raising with me.
Mm. And,
and I wonder also if there's a role for the office to play,
again, linked to, um, this measure in relation
to public protection orders.
Um, we've of course seen the Chisel case
and the Law Commission now come, come out with a series
of recommendations again, yesterday.
Uh, the view from corrections was that they had noted that,
and their view was they would speak to, uh,
the minister over the course of 12 months
to address that issue.
Um, which seems to me
to be an awfully long time when we have the rare case
of a declaration of inconsistency that points
to breaches of the Bill of Rights Act.
Yeah. So, I mean, there are a range of issues
of this kind, uh, that relate to, uh, our work,
uh, with corrections in, in the prison system.
Uh, and, uh, we are actively engaged, uh, with them.
Our team visited, as you will have seen, 121 facilities,
though some of those were dementia facilities
and other types of facilities,
but a lot of them were prison visits.
Um, in the course of, uh, the year, that's, uh,
that's under review and they are continuing, uh,
that program of work, uh,
they produce reports which are actionable for, uh, the,
for corrections and for the general managers
of the various prisons, um, that can take real action
and real time, uh, to better enable, um,
uh, the dignity of appropriate dignity, uh, of prisoners.
But issues like the one you've just raised,
or, uh, the way in which, um, compulsory treatment orders
lapse when you go into, into prison on remand, uh,
those sorts of issues, the mental health, uh, challenges,
uh, that are inherent in that are all, um, you know, issues
that the office is both interested in
and is actively, uh, looking at and thinking about.
Yeah. Okay. A quick sub, um, just a quick stop on that.
Um, in your discussions with prisoners, did any
of the issues of being able to vote or not surface?
No, but, but in fairness, I didn't ask No. That I was just
Interested if it came up as a priority for anyone.
No, thank you.
Uh, thank you Ombudsman.
So I'm guessing it, my little knowledge of, uh,
actually means that you are the guardian of the, uh,
people's mother Ino New Zealand,
and I think on the per first page you talk
about fairness for war.
This might sound a bit like a supplementary to, um, um, uh,
a, you know, vouches question,
but you talked about outreach.
Yeah. What kind of outreach are you actually doing?
Because the reason I ask this often when I'm talking
to people in the ethnic communities, they don't know
what Ombudsman is, they don't know the role, they don't know
that there is an office called Ombudsman's office.
Uh, and I'm trying to find out
what outreach you are actually doing. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
So I mean, the most, the most, uh, recent outreach
that I've found that I've been doing was in, uh, Akes Bay.
I think, uh, and, uh, it might be something since then, but,
but that, that was the main, the the last structure sort
of outreach program that I did within a community
with our outreach team.
Uh, and in that process we engaged particularly with, uh,
cyclone Gabriel, uh, community,
and there's a whole range of complainants who are across
that community who are, uh, still wrestling
with the challenges of Cyclone Gabriel.
We engaged with the councils
that had obviously been responsible for, uh,
the administering of, uh, of that we engaged
with the Pacific community, going to one of their churches
and engaging, uh, with, with that community
and a ra a wide range of issues that were raised.
Uh, at that, uh, Hui, uh, we engaged with, uh, a range
of Iwi Maori, um, particularly health providers that were,
that were working in that health
and mental health space often with, um, youth justice,
um, uh, parameters.
Uh, so we did go to a do do a lot of work, um,
with communities in, in that way.
Since then, I've been at the, uh, uh, what's it called?
What is it called? Um, una, um, uh, event
in Hamilton, um, which brought together Iwi leaders
to talk about, uh, children in care, uh,
and a range of other, um, a range of other presentations
and activities, uh, to ensure
the visibility of the office as best I can.
Yeah. So that's, that's the way in which we tend to work
with, is the team go into a, to an area
for about four days, uh,
and they spend time with different parts of the community
over the period of that time, and they'll talk to the media
and they'll talk to others, uh, to engage them.
I tend to, in that situation, drop, drop into that program
for a day or two.
Have you spent time in Auckland?
Yes, I have spent time Majority
of pop Asian population, uh, for example, live in Auckland.
Yes. Uh, did you ever engage with the Asian population
to actually talk about the, um, ombudsman's office
and the process in which that they can be,
um, assisted? Yeah.
Well, um, what I'd say to you is we have in our, in our,
um, uh, outreach group, our Engage,
our Community Engagement Group, a an Asian, uh, specific,
um, person, uh, who is Asian, of course, but,
but who is responsible for a specific outreach
into the Asian community.
Now it sounds one person to
that size community does some a pretty, uh,
Asian is huge. Yeah,
I know. I know.
And so, so I understand that that the challenge,
but the point I'm making is that the office does
recognize the importance of that community,
and we do have dedicated
and now permanent resource, which is, which were just done,
um, which is applied specifically, uh, to that task.
In terms of your direct question to me, have I spent time
with the, uh, with the Asian community?
No, I haven't in this role.
Uh, obviously I have in previous roles, uh,
but I haven't in this role yet gone to a specifically Asian,
um, event or context.
Uh, but I'm very happy to do that, of course.
Thank you for that. Because I'm actually responding
to the words on your annual report, which actually says
to ya, audit audited, which means fairness for all.
Correct. And if people don't have information, uh,
to the appeals and access
to Ombudsman, I don't think it'll be fair.
So I just, just just to be clear, that outreach
that I'm talking about is only part
of the way in which we engage with the community.
Do you have We have, we have multiple, um, materials
in a wide variety of languages, including most
of the major Asian languages spoken here, uh,
that we provide into all kinds of places like, uh,
community law centers, for example.
All of those sorts of community based, uh, organizations.
We have a website that has on it, uh, you know, all
of the materials that are available again, uh, in multiple,
um, uh, with multiple languages and things of that kind.
So, so sorry, schools, uh,
and we also gone to schools as Bridget just saying to me.
So, so, so there's the, the, I was talking
to you about the structured sort of engagements that,
that we do across the country, uh,
but that's supported by these wider pieces.
Having said that, the point I was making
before, uh, I'm, I'm not sitting here feeling comfortable,
that are 46% outcome for people being aware
of, uh, our offices.
Adequate, nor am I comfortable with the metrics for Maori
and Asian communities
and Pacific communities, which tend to obs skew lower, uh,
than the, um, uh,
And Mila, middle Eastern,
Latin American and African community.
Yeah. Like that. Just some data, some data for you.
So for our, um,
in-person community engagements in the 24 25 year, um,
our team traveled the country
and there was 73 community engagements over the year,
and that include included 25 specifically
with ethnic community organizations.
Um, and we also surveyed those people.
So there, um, generally for all community engagements,
the awareness level of the ombudsman prior
to our engagement was 36%.
Um, post engagement,
their confidence in accessing our services was 89%.
And their agreement that our engagement had helped
to raise their awareness about the ombudsman was 96%.
Um, so it shows that our engagement when we, when we're able
to reach those communities is, is working. Thank you.
Without taking too much time, could I actually request,
uh, the information as to which
societies you've actually engaged with?
Absolutely. Because the reason why I asked is
that when you actually talk about multicultural New Zealand,
that is not Asian.
Yeah. You need,
if you're talking about know our Christchurch Korean
association, that specific Korean
association. Yeah, that'd be
Great if we could get that information
that's on page 138 of annual.
I didn't see that. And you could see, have a look at that.
I can tell you straight away. Asian Family Services
community group, Chinese New Settlers services.
Okay. Trust or specific. We'll, we'll read that.
I think if it's in the, um, if it's in the report. Andy?
Uh, yeah, just a very, very quick one.
You mentioned, um, earlier the, um, the OIA
and, um, the sort of frivolous complaints and so on.
Do you also have any thoughts around,
and you've probably be well aware
of this from previous roles as well, the, the use that of,
uh, the OIA or the OR
or laima in a, a very sweeping way,
which people just ask for everything under the sun.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Uh, they're often doing a fishing trip.
Um, yep. And the ability for agencies to actually say,
actually, can you narrow that down,
be but reasonable about this?
So, so one, uh, agencies have the ability to say,
can you narrow, narrow it down,
be a bit reasonable about this.
Mm-hmm. Number two, if compilation is, is,
is an extraordinarily, um, large task,
uh, well, they've got charging.
Well, they can just say no. Yeah.
So, so, so, uh, both mechanisms are, are both,
And you are, and you are satisfied that that is working
as it should, or, or our agency's reluctant to do that
because often, often they may well be reluctant
to actually say, well, actually we think you,
you're pushing us too hard
because the fear of what might then result
Yeah. Publicity.
So, so it is about striking balance here.
And, and I do think that we are seeing wide number of those,
uh, as you characterize them, fishing expeditions.
Yes. Uh, than probably we did in the past.
And that does put enormous pressure on agencies.
I'm very conscious, uh, of that.
So we are saying to, to, um, agencies, uh,
that we, we will look at all of those issues
when we are thinking about the, um, their ability to use
the provisions around charging
and the provisions around, uh, simply, uh,
saying, we can't deal with this because,
because compilation is just too great.
And, and in recent times, there have been a number
of decisions made, um, in which the provisions relating
to just that burden, uh, have been,
uh, been allowed to.
So you're giving some comfort to those agencies
to respond appropriately?
Yeah, we're saying we, we as always, what we try
to be is objective, uh, here, uh,
and we try to objectively assess, uh,
the competing interests between public interest and,
and the pressure that's, uh, good, thank you.
The statute recognizes, uh, that, uh, you know, levels
of pressure being put on agencies as inappropriate.
Thank you. We've got a couple of, um,
questions left and only a couple of minutes.
So, um, go to, and then Celia,
Thank you. Um,
I have a concern around ministerial interference
with OIA through misuse
of the no surprises, um, rule.
Yeah. And that's an issue
that your predecessor had identified.
So, um, I want to know if it's an ongoing concern
and whether there's monitoring there, um,
and whether you are finding
that ministers are being responsive in terms of working
with you to address that.
Uh, look, it, I mean, it, it's always been an issue.
Uh, and, uh, it's been an issue probably since the
legislation was first put in place
and across, across, uh, multiple, uh, uh, parliaments.
Uh, I know, uh, it's been a concern, uh, for exposure.
Uh, and it remains a concern for us, uh, that
the provisions of the legislation,
which put the responsibility
to make a decision within the timeframes stipulated,
um, uh, on the chief executive of the agency,
uh, are being properly complied with.
Now, within that, uh, it is appropriate
that chief executives keep their ministers appraised of,
you know, that sort of no surprises basis,
but as you say, uh, that does not mean
that they should abdicate to the responsibility
for the decision, uh, to the minister.
Indeed, indeed. That's, that's simply not
what the legislation allows.
Uh, and, uh, we do keep an eye on, on that
and where we see it, we call it out.
And, and from my, from my knowledge, it was, um,
the Minister of Health who was concerned with, um, some
of the issues identified. Is that correct?
Oh, look, I couldn't, I couldn't say that.
I could say there's been many,
many ministers over the years, I'm sure
that have been in that space.
I, I can't specifically think of, uh, the Minister of Health
as being the concern there.
Uh, are you confident that
that's no longer occurring in terms of the no surprises
rule being used inappropriately?
I'm confident that, uh, the issue has been consistently
and properly raised by this office.
It's been raised by Mr. Bocher.
It's been raised by our oi, uh, practice team, uh,
when they look at the practice of, um, of agencies and,
and, uh, uh, across the, across the board.
Uh, and it is being consistently monitored in terms
of the complainants that we are receiving
and called out when it occurs.
So, so can I say absolutely that it's not occurring?
No, I can't. Um,
but I can say that the frameworks that we have in place
ensure that where we believe it is occurring,
we can act and we do act.
And, and if ministers do continue to gate,
keep information, is it your view
that the legislation should change to, um,
perhaps even impose penalties in terms of,
or make more explicit that, um, the no,
no surprises clause cannot be used in that that way?
Well, I think the legislation's really explicit that the,
uh, the, the, uh,
no surprises law can't be used in that way.
So I'm not, I I don't believe it's
because of the, the way the legislation's crafted
that this, uh, this occurs.
I think it's because of political pressure
and political management, I suppose in terms of, uh,
the way some ministers, uh, want to want to operate in terms
of penalties, I'm not a fan of, uh, putting penalties.
It's most commonly at the moment debated, not
so much in relation to ministers,
but in relation to, uh, chief executives in my view,
the way in which the, the, the manner of this office, which,
uh, this has already spoken about, manner
of this office rests to large measure on the fact
that we are a sort of community based, uh, organization,
and that we are free to complainants
and that we are independent of government
and all of those attributes.
We don't want to be the people.
We, we are different from judges and, and courts,
and we are deliberately different.
We're inquisitorial not adversarial, you know, and,
and so if we start penalizing people,
that will change the dynamic of the organization in a way
that I suspect will disengage, um, a lot
of the communities that we are there to serve. Thank
You. Final question, Celia.
I'll be quick.
Um, it's really in that area
of outreach schools in particular,
I was looking at the resources, um Yeah.
That you produce Yeah. Um, to keeping things fair.
Yeah. Um, do you have any idea how much uptake it's been?
How, how has it been put out to teachers and or schools?
Um, and have you worked at all with other
broadly connected organizations such
as Services and Justice?
We are also trying to do civic education.
Um, I would have to give, talk to
The, um, yep. So,
uh, when we launched the product, we, um,
attended the social service teachers conference
and presented at that so that, um,
teachers across the country were aware of the resource.
Um, we are also, uh, as schools, um, have requested,
we are working with them individually.
So Otaki College asked us to come and work with them on it.
Um, and we can also get you some data from our, um,
website if you like, about the number
of times it's been age views,
downloads, we can get that data
And, and the interaction with the other, um, other Oh yes.
Public agencies in, involved in civics education. Yes. So
We worked with the Ministry of Education
and building this in this building, this toolkit.
So they were, um, involved with us and shaping it,
and they're also promoting it through their networks.
So presumably they will also work with the other ones.
And I'm not aware of that, we hope. Okay. Thank you.
Thank you. We have run out of time.
Thank you very much for very engaging, um, scrutiny,
Uh, session. And,
um, we appreciate
The time. Thank you.
Thank you for.